Until the disputed 2000 U.S. presidential election between George W. Bush and Al Gore, most voters did not give second thought to how they cast their ballots, but ever since then, voting technology has become highly controversial. Nowadays, almost all ballots in the U.S. are counted using computer-assisted technologies, which poses several risks associated with security and authenticity. However, our democracy depends on the vulnerabilities that online voting aims to resolve, which includes increasing voter turnout and confidence. In a country where the citizen’s trust in the integrity of elections has diminished and the number of lawsuits over election issues has more than doubled over the last two decades, online voting is essential in addressing and resolving these issues. 

	Across the United States, many polling stations have been closed in minority neighborhoods, had their locations changed from one election to another, and have been inaccessible, ill-equipped, or understaffed, leaving voters standing in line for hours. Online voting, however, eases the entire process of voting for every citizen, especially for those who are isolated from election centers. In fact, new research by a University of Chicago scholar found that the ability to vote with a mobile device increased turnout by three to five percentage points in the 2018 federal election in West Virginia, suggesting that mobile voting has the potential to significantly boost turnout in future elections. Given that the 2016 US presidential election had one of the lowest voter turnouts in the last two decades, increasing voter participation is critical, as it results in a more fair democratic process and increases the overall legitimacy of the election. Additionally, given the unprecedented circumstances of COVID-19 this year, online voting can eliminate the need to go to election centers altogether, which could become a hotspot for infections. With the upcoming US presidential election in November and a vaccine not expected to come out until next year, allowing people to vote from the comfort of their home will be essential. 

	The cost savings and increased efficiency associated with online voting makes it suitable for widespread adoption. Various envelopes, forms, and documents are no longer needed, and the overall voting process is sped up, especially where advance voting is concerned. After voting in the polling booth, voters no longer have to go to the election official to have their ballots stamped and wait until they have made an entry in the voting register. Voters also do not have to worry about ambiguity when interpreting an online vote, as illegible numbers can cause problems when traditional paper ballots are used. In fact, America’s transition to paperless voting had its roots in the confusion caused by the ambiguous ballot marking in the 2000 presidential election. In the aftermath, Congress passed the Help America Vote Act (HAVA), which allocated $3.9 billion to replace old voting systems with new, state of the art equipment. The systems that were implemented as a result of HAVA displayed text in multiple languages, accommodated the hearing and visually impaired, and simplified logistics for poll workers. After voting is over, online voting systems eliminate the need for a manual count and provide accurate and quick publication of results. So compared to the traditional paper voting process, online voting provides several advantages leading to greater accessibility for the general population and higher efficiency. 

	Despite the numerous benefits of online voting, computer scientists and security experts are nearly unanimous in opposition to it, with Stanford computer science professor David Dill stating that internet voting would be “a complete disaster”. The reality is that computers are highly complex and there is no way to guarantee that the software and hardware have any errors or have not been maliciously attacked. In fact, until now, the internet as we know it has generally failed to meet basic voting system requirements: a vote must be cast and counted for the intended candidate, counted only once, remain anonymous, and be verifiable after the fact, even through a power outage. Voting through the internet presents a possibility that individuals could cast their ballots multiple times for a candidate - something called the “double spend problem”. A hacker with sufficient resources can easily shatter the legitimacy of an election by sending in fraudulent votes. So from the perspective of election trustworthiness, internet voting is a disaster. 

	When analyzing the election process, it is clear that trust is concentrated in the hands of state, federal agencies, and other civic institutions, which are all prone to hacking, fraud, and human error. This is an issue that stems from paper voting and online voting, as they both present vulnerabilities. The fact of the matter is privacy and cybersecurity are essential to ensure a legitimate election process, which is something that online voting is aiming to achieve. Estonia has been using online voting since 2005, where over the past four elections, over 30% of the participants voted over the internet. Thanks to a safe, convenient and flexible digital ecosystem, Estonia has reached an unmatched level of transparency in governance and built broad trust in its digital society. As a result, Estonia saves over 844 years of working time annually and has become a hassle-free environment for business and entrepreneurship. Additionally, West Virginia has built a mobile voting app for absentee voters in the midterm elections. West Virginians serving in the military and their families have already begun casting their ballots through a blockchain-based app on their phone. So while online voting in the U.S. poses several vulnerabilities, the development of blockchain technology can be used to solve them, as it fulfills each voting system requirement and dismisses the risk of being prone to hackers. 

Ensuring a frictionless voting system will be critical to uphold the democracy of the United States. As we are currently in a transitory period in history, where we might see limited human interaction and mobility for up to a year, increasing accessibility to voting will be essential for not only the upcoming election, but for future elections as well. Although online voting is not a silver bullet and poses risks, when done properly, it can boost voter participation, avoid administrative errors at polling stations, and help restore the public’s trust in the electoral process. With the continued development of blockchain-based voting technologies, the future of America’s voting process is sure to be online through the comfort of your home. 
